# FreeBSD Foundation Laptop Update - March 2025



## Completed in March



### Two drivers for WiFI 4 and 5 now available

#### iwlwifi driver for Intel WiFi devices

Users with Intel WiFi devices (AX200 and newer models) can now access contemporary WiFi features by default in FreeBSD's development branches.

These improvements include hardware encryption acceleration for better security with less CPU usage, plus support for HT (WiFi 4) and VHT (WiFi 5) connection standards that offer significantly faster wireless speeds.These enhancements are currently available in the main and stable/14 branches. With successful testing, they will become standard in the upcoming FreeBSD 14.3 release.

If you experience any issues after upgrading, you can easily disable these features using system tunables until problems are resolved.

>NOTE: Intel WiFi firmware will be removed from the core system (src.git) during April. After this change, users will need to install the firmware through the package system instead.

>NOTE: since the end of March, an updated set of test instructions has been created: https://lists.freebsd.org/archives/freebsd-wireless/2025-April/003131.html 



GitHub issues: https://github.com/FreeBSDFoundation/proj-laptop/issues/36, https://github.com/FreeBSDFoundation/proj-laptop/issues/33 

#### iwx driver for Intel WiFi devices

The iwx driver for Intel WiFi chipsets originates from OpenBSD and was ported to FreeBSD by Future Crew LLC who kindly provided a source release.

iwx offers support for many recent Intel WiFi cards. This driver should support running these cards with legacy, HT and VHT rates. There are some issues remaining in the port, but at this point wider testing is sought.

NOTE: To avoid breaking deployed WiFi configurations, iwx probes with a lower priority than iwlwifi. This can be changed by blocking `if_iwlwifi` with devmatch.

GitHub issue: https://github.com/FreeBSDFoundation/proj-laptop/issues/5

### pkgbasify tool is now more robust

The pkgbasify tool was created to enable laptop users to transition their existing FreeBSD systems to pkgbase management. Updates improved reliability and user safety during the transition to managing the FreeBSD base system with pkgbase. 

While the conversion process is inherently complex, this update significantly reduces risk by ensuring that no changes are made to the system if an error occurs before the critical point of no return — when pkgbasify begins overwriting base system files. Additionally, more error-prone steps, such as fetching required packages, are now performed early to prevent failures later in the process. 

To further support recovery in case of issues, pkgbasify will also attempt to create a boot environment using bectl, allowing users to easily roll back if needed. These enhancements make the conversion process safer and more resilient for users.

GitHub issue: https://github.com/FreeBSDFoundation/proj-laptop/issues/65

## Work in review

### Sleep using S0ix and s2idle low power states

> This functionality remains in review from February. 

A new power management driver (acpi_spmc) has been developed that can understand device power requirements and help laptops enter deeper sleep states using S0ix suspend hooks. This will enable better battery-saving sleep modes such as s2idle. Support for the lowest power state, D3cold, was added, along with fixes to ensure devices properly transition between power modes.



Testing has started, but more rigorous end-to-end testing and debugging is needed.

GitHub issue: https://github.com/FreeBSDFoundation/proj-laptop/issues/32.

### Fixing blockers to make Linux WiFi drivers work

> This functionality remains in review from February, but there has been some progress with the review. Please see the GitHub issue for the latest updates. 



To better support Linux WiFi drivers, work on the translation layer - the Linux Kernel Programming Interface (LinuxKPI) implementation in FreeBSD - has been ongoing as part of this project. The LinuxKPI layer is an interface layer that provides API-compatible implementations of many Linux kernel interfaces, greatly simplifying the adaptation of Linux driver source to FreeBSD. The current blocking problems relate specifically the way it currently handles memory allocations where there are differences between FreeBSD and Linux.  Wireless drivers such as rtw8x (Realtek) are not getting the contiguous memory allocation that they need when their requests are larger than a memory page. Work in February has focused on picking up some existing logged issues and getting them resolved.

As of the end of March the resolutions are in review:
* https://reviews.freebsd.org/D46661 (accepted)
* https://reviews.freebsd.org/D46656 (accepted)
* https://reviews.freebsd.org/D46657 (needs follow-up work)

GitHub issue: https://github.com/FreeBSDFoundation/proj-laptop/issues/60

### Port of Linux 6.7 graphics drivers

> This functionality remains in review from February, but there has been some progress with the review. Please see the GitHub issue for the latest updates. 

The December [pull request to add support for Linux 6.7 graphics drivers to drm-kmod](https://github.com/freebsd/drm-kmod/pull/332) is now waiting for related patches to be accepted. Of 26 submitted patches, 24 have been accepted. There is also a [related hardware pull request](https://github.com/freebsd/drm-kmod-firmware/pull/36) that is open.

GitHub issue: https://github.com/FreeBSDFoundation/proj-laptop/issues/47

### Port of Linux 6.8 graphics drivers

Newly put in for review in March, the port of Linux 6.8 graphics drivers has been submitted to drm-kmod for review https://github.com/freebsd/drm-kmod/pull/344

GitHub Issue: https://github.com/FreeBSDFoundation/proj-laptop/issues/49 

## Progress updates

### Power Management

#### Suspend and resume for LinuxKPI-based WiFi

Work is underway to ensure that LinuxKPI-controlled wireless adapters follow the laptop in suspend and resume transitions.

A general framework has been developed that successfully propagates suspend requests to the LinuxKPI management layer with only minor modifications required to the drivers.

Currently, development is blocked by an issue in the LinuxKPI PCI code that needs to be resolved before work can continue. 

When complete this implementation will allow laptop users to save power and extend battery life by properly transitioning wireless adapters into low-power states during system suspend and seamlessly resuming full functionality when needed.

GitHub issue: https://github.com/FreeBSDFoundation/proj-laptop/issues/58

### Compatibility and system requirements

#### Enhancing performance with heterogeneous cores

The two work items that are in progress to improve CPU task management ([optimizing scheduling with 256-queue runqueues](https://github.com/FreeBSDFoundation/proj-laptop/issues/54) and [High performance from laptops with heterogeneous cores](https://github.com/FreeBSDFoundation/proj-laptop/issues/22)) are still in progress. 



The kind folks at Netflix have been testing the scheduler changes and provided their web latency and % CPU graphs to us. The focus of the development work on this has moved on to extending the `late` workload simulator to simulate more complex workloads to help with development, and gathering metrics from real-world web workloads to create emulated test workloads. This is almost complete. 



For the performance optimization element, the `cpuset` approach to implementing the functionality is not flexible enough, and interferes with administrator control. Instead, we will perform the core selection policy inside a process' applicable  `cpuset`.



This work, once complete, will enable processes to be directed to either high-power "Performance" cores for demanding tasks or energy-efficient "Efficiency" cores for lighter workloads. By implementing these changes, overall performance is expected to improve while power consumption is balanced, resulting in a more responsive and efficient computing experience.



GitHub issues: https://github.com/FreeBSDFoundation/proj-laptop/issues/54,  https://github.com/FreeBSDFoundation/proj-laptop/issues/22 



#### Improving support for audio routing

There has been a re-think in the overall approach to supporting audio devices which should be more flexible in adapting to a range of edge cases.

The work which is underway improves how headphones and speakers work on the system. Currently, /dev/dsp functions as a symlink to /dev/dsp${hw.snd.default_unit}, but this approach has limitations as applications cannot use it as a true generic default device that handles routing automatically. Many users have needed to rely on virtual_oss to override /dev/dsp with a solution that functions as a router.

The update implements a new virtual audio device called /dev/vdsp that's responsible for dispatching to whatever device is set as the default unit. The system has been modified so that dsp_clone() now clones /dev/vdsp instead of directly cloning the specific default device. This means when applications open /dev/dsp, they no longer have to worry about the device becoming unavailable or the default unit changing. Instead, the sound(4) subsystem automatically handles all necessary routing to the appropriate default device.



This change effectively builds hot-swapping capability directly into sound(4), eliminating the need for additional audio server software like virtual_oss for this purpose. The new implementation ensures both hot-plugging and hot-unplugging work seamlessly, making audio devices work more reliably and intuitively on FreeBSD.



GitHub issue: https://github.com/FreeBSDFoundation/proj-laptop/issues/17


## In conclusion

The Foundation would like to once again share a huge thank you to everyone involved with this project.

Thanks go out to:

* Our developers
  * Aymeric Wibo
  * Bjoern Zeeb
  * Christos Margiolis
  * Isaac Freund
  * Jean-Sebastien Pedron
  * Li-Wen Hsu
  * Mitchell Horne
  * Olivier Certner
  * Tom Jones
* The project team:
  * Deb Goodkin
  * Ed Maste
  * Joe Mingrone
  * Alice Sowerby
* The Laptop and Desktop Working Group
  * Chris Moerz
  * All attendees
* The FreeBSD Project
* Netflix, who have been testing our scheduler patchsets
* Dell, who have donated the UVC kernel driver.
* Future Crew, who provided the iwx WiFi driver source code.

Please refer to the [README](../README.md) for more information about the FreeBSD Foundation's Laptop Project.
