# FreeBSD Foundation Laptop Update - January 2025

## Completed in January

### Technical debt paydown in pkg

The pkg package manager has undergone significant improvements in two key areas. First, a rewritten scheduler for installation jobs now uses a directed graph model to handle dependencies, preventing unnecessary job splitting and fixing critical bugs that previously caused upgrades to fail. This enhancement is available in pkg version 1.21.99.3.

Second, shared library tracking has been redesigned. Package creation now includes base system libraries in dependency lists, eliminating the ALLOW_BASE_SHLIBS option while improving integration between ports and PkgBase packages. Additional support for lib32 and Linuxulator shared libraries has been implemented. These shared library improvements have been included in pkg 2.0.5 release.

GitHub issue: https://github.com/FreeBSDFoundation/proj-laptop/issues/46

## Work in review this month

### Linux 6.7 drivers
The December pull request to add support for Linux 6.7 to drm-kmod has been under active refinement in collaboration with the community. https://github.com/freebsd/drm-kmod/pull/332 

## Progress updates
### Power Management
#### Sleep using S0ix and s2idle low power states

A new power management driver (acpi_spmc) has been developed that can understand device power requirements and help laptops enter deeper sleep states using S0ix suspend hooks. This will enable better battery-saving sleep modes such as s2idle. Support for the lowest power state, D3cold, was added, along with fixes to ensure devices properly transition between power modes.

Progress is currently blocked by an [upstream software issue](https://github.com/acpica/acpica/pull/993) about how different sleep states, D3cold/D3hot, are identified.

Testing on an AMD Framework laptop shows the system frequently wakes up unnecessarily due to hardware (SCI) interrupts that can't be blocked without also blocking legitimate wake events. A potential solution might involve using AMD's power management controller.

FreeBSD's interrupt handling system needs updating to use newer power management methods (GPE masking needs updating from _PSW to _DSW objects).

GitHub issues: https://github.com/FreeBSDFoundation/proj-laptop/issues/32 and https://github.com/FreeBSDFoundation/proj-laptop/issues/55 


### Compatibility and system requirements
#### WiFi 4 & 5 Implementation Progress
Development of [WiFi 4 (802.11n)](https://github.com/FreeBSDFoundation/proj-laptop/issues/36) and [WiFi 5 (802.11ac)](https://github.com/FreeBSDFoundation/proj-laptop/issues/33) support is progressing with support for data rates at HT (High Throughput) and VHT (Very High Throughput) implemented in LinuxKPI. Initial compatibility code between the FreeBSD kernel’s WiFI 4 interface, net80211, and LinuxKPI drivers has been implemented. 

Basic HT/VHT receive and transmit functionality works with modern iwlwifi (Intel WiFi) chipsets. Further testing needed to ensure rtw88 and rtw89 (Realtek) drivers remain compatible. Additional code is required for older Intel chipsets to support VHT. Detailed testing of various option/flag combinations will be necessary to refine compatibility code.

#### Enhancing performance with heterogeneous cores
Work is underway to improve CPU task management by [optimizing scheduling with 256-queue runqueues](https://github.com/FreeBSDFoundation/proj-laptop/issues/54). This update serves as a foundation for more efficient task distribution, which will in turn enable processes to be directed to either high-power "Performance" cores for demanding tasks or energy-efficient "Efficiency" cores for lighter workloads. By implementing these changes, overall performance is expected to improve while power consumption is balanced, resulting in a more responsive and efficient computing experience.

#### Improving support for non-standard audio jacks
An [experimental patch](https://reviews.freebsd.org/D48809) was submitted to improve support for non-standard audio jacks. 

Note: since this was submitted, there has been a [re-think in the overall approach](https://github.com/FreeBSDFoundation/proj-laptop/issues/17) which should be more flexible in adapting to a range of edge cases.

### Driver for Intel WiFi interfaces 
Work this month has been building on the [POC completed last month](https://github.com/FreeBSDFoundation/proj-laptop/issues/45). Support is being added for HT (High Throughput) rates and is being tested on 2.4 and 5GHz frequencies.

## In conclusion
The Foundation would like to extend a huge thank you to all the people who have helped to deliver the great progress this month.

Thanks go out to:
* Our developers
  * Aymeric Wibo
  * Bjoern Zeeb
  * Christos Margiolis
  * Isaac Freund
  * Jean-Sebastien Pedron
  * Li-Wen Hsu
  * Mitchell Horne
  * Olivier Certner
  * Thinker Li
  * Tom Jones

* The project team:
  * Deb Goodkin
  * Ed Maste
  * Joe Mingrone
  * Alice Sowerby

* The Laptop and Desktop Working Group
  * Chris Moerz
  * All attendees

* The FreeBSD Project
* Netflix, who have been testing our scheduler patchsets

Please refer to the [README](../README.md) for more information about the FreeBSD Foundation's Laptop Project.
